it's the Battle of their bows that's
right we have been busy busy busy on
board clarity the last few days can
barely even move around inside clarity
right now we got so many projects going
on oh my god the cushions are torn of
the laundry room was just about finished
nice job Nik got the solar that's
underway but it is a mess mess mess so
we're outside and we are weighing in on
the very very popular debate catamaran
versus mana haul dump dump dump we've
had three mana holes and one catamaran
so we officially can give you the pros
and cons of both we're experts no really
it's a little weird to see people doing
this pros and cons of catamarans and
versus monohulls
some of them have never even like they
owned a mana hall
they've never owned a catamaran but
they're talking about the pros and cons
and that happens the other way where
they own a catamaran they've never had a
mana hole and they're making a
comparison yeah we are uniquely
qualified three mana holes one catamaran
and I want to give it away right off the
bat there is no clear winner that's
right it depends on what you want to do
I think it also depends on your attitude
but I think if we show you all the pros
and cons you can see where me you may
need to adjust your attitude and we get
a lot of questions about this via email
and in comments so we thought hey let's
just have it on the record let's do it
and be thorough so here we go boy are we
gonna be thorough kind of make it into
your game show the first category
between the cat versus mano is money
well catamarans got a couple dollar
signs yeah you get a lot more bang for
your buck when it comes to mana holes
got a hundred thousand dollars to spend
on a boat you can get a very very
decently outfitted decent-sized mana
hall and you are barely scratching the
surface with a category either gran does
not buy you a whole lot
yeah value yes if it's a question we we
think if it's a question between going
now with a monohull versus going a whole
lot later with a catamaran I would say
maybe go now because yeah because if you
wait you may never go yeah that happens
to a lot of thing that but that's the
reality you're faced with berthing
catamaran losses that is correct if
you're planning on only cruising part of
the year let's say three to six months
it might make a lot of sense to just
stick with the mono whole because the
berthing costs for a catamaran are so
much more the best you can do is about
1.5 times the cost of a mono whole in
some cases especially on the islands you
are paying double the mono whole rates
and that really really adds up for
year-round if you're out cruising all
the time you're not going to spend a lot
of time in marinas but when you're in
marinas it's gonna cost you a lot more
on a cat nothing to do there yeah
maintenance yes there's another very
very clear winner when it comes to
maintenance not just the cost but the
extent of maintenance monohulls of
course have just one engine one rudder
the rigging can oftentimes be simpler
and doesn't have to be changed out quite
as often the standing rigging on a
catamaran really needs to be changed out
about every eight to ten years models
you can probably get by with a lot
longer than that hauling out calling out
Wow who knew this would be so difficult
not only it's a lot more expensive to
haul out of catamaran but when you've
got a boat that's 25 feet wide you've
got to be in a larger yachting facility
a larger boat yard where the larger
travel lifts or a larger crane and there
are fewer of those out there and they
know it so they charge a bit more
trucking now this is something I've
never really heard talked about in the
cat versus wanna whole debate but with
our last boat we were able to truck it
up
and down the west coast saving a lot of
wear and tear and exposure to the gnarly
Pacific Ocean and we had friends last
year was the year before they trucked
their 47-foot monohull coast to coast
that's amazing you skip the canal you
skip all that wear and tear and you can
just truck your boat across the land not
so with most catamarans anything a beam
er than about 14 feet it's a no-go
now catamarans did end up with one green
on this subject ready and that is
selling that's right
when you go to sell your mana haul even
if it's a very very nice mana haul you
are up against every other mana hole
that's been manufactured since about
1975 it seems and there are fewer cats
on the market so when it comes time to
sell seems everybody wants a cat and if
you're priced right it's gonna go quick
all right
that's category number one the money
category and it seems to me the cat
Imran's lost the mana hole is the clear
winner when it comes to money yeah
number two is category number two is
sailing sailing and the first subject is
tradition yes we didn't really know what
word to use here but when it comes to
that romantic notion of gliding across
the water under billowing sails I don't
know the traditional mana haul for us
seems to win out just a bit that's right
you are sailing the way our ancestors
sailed it's true original first boats
and there's something pretty magical
about that yeah when you're bounced
around in your little mana hole it's the
same as when Joshua Slocum headed out
for his round-the-world trip so we give
it to the mana home yes
sailing well sailing well it is easier
to
learn how to sail well on a mana home
and that's basically because you can
feel the wind and you can feel the
responsiveness of the boat much better
on a mana haul than you can on a
catamaran you just don't get the
feedback so sailing well is easier on a
model and I would say this smaller the
boat you can learn on the better I don't
know it's kind of a toss-up I think I
want to switch these in general if
you're starting from scratch with no
experience sailing boats I think that
it's easier to learn how to sail on a
category okay
still harder to learn how to sail well
but easier to learn enjoy it's true yeah
more upright sail management oh yes so
imagine yourself on a dark night without
a moon and the wind is piping up and
it's time to reef the mainsail well on a
catamaran you aren't journeying on deck
heeled over like this it's mainly flat
it might be moving around it's probably
moving around quite a bit but it's not
healing over sail management is so much
easier on a cat yeah all right upwind oh
yes the old upwind abate your catamaran
doesn't sail upwind very well well my
bottle hole certainly goes to weather
better than your cat okay okay okay we
are gonna give it to the mono home with
better overall upwind sailing ability
but there's a huge asterisk here there's
a huge caveat and that caveat is that
when you're cruising you almost never
sail to whether you are always looking
for weather conditions in which you are
on a broad reach of beam reach or
sailing downwind gentlemen as they say
don't sail to weather all right the next
category is storms that's right we've
been in real storm conditions about 15
years ago on our first cruise about 4
days out of San Diego
huge breaking C's 6065 not wins it was a
35,000 pound mana haul and it was a
handful it was quite a story you can see
it on another video on our channel we
have not been on this catamaran in full
storm conditions so just based on our
experience we would say that while we
could probably handle those conditions
on this boat we would rather be on a
mana home in storm conditions the trick
of course avoid the storm positions
altogether and with the technology
nowadays you can pretty much do that
right yeah and a weatherman on board
that helps okay the next one is comfort
at sea comfort at sea and this should
come to no surprise to most folks that
the catamaran is really the clear clear
winner here yeah the fact that you're
not healing the fact that you got all
this open space when you're at sea in
most conditions overall it's much much
more comfortable on the category the
next subject is confused seas yes this
is where we're looking at waves and
swells coming from two different
directions and after being at sea in
this boat and confused seas and in mana
halls we have got to give it to the mana
home the mana haul handles confused seas
especially with lighter winds better
because you've got two holes with the
catamaran
the waves are reacting with one hole at
a different time than they are the other
hole and you get kind of this jerky
motion you're kind of and you're up at
the helm and it does feel a bit like a
washing machine yeah so while cats are
in general more comfortable at sea than
mana holes in really confused seas we
give it to the mono ah motion the
age-old debate with catamarans we don't
like catamarans we don't like the motion
on them all right the motion is
different on a cat it's quicker it's
faster
overall though motion goes to the
catamarans it is much better it's much
much more tolerable than the motion of a
mana hole which is maybe slower but much
more dramatic and that really wears you
down over time and the next one is ooh
maneuvering we're gonna give it to the
catamaran in a big big way we're talking
about maneuvering in confined spaces and
for the most part maneuvering out a
cantor brand is a lot like pushing a
shopping cart you're pushing one side
then you're pushing the other if you
want to spin it you just put one engine
into reverse spin it the other way you
can spin this boat pretty much in its
own length which is amazing and I got to
tell you what the monohulls we've had
this most stressful part of the entire
thing was always the docking yeah
because of course you want to come in
slow but the slower you come in the less
rudder effectiveness you have they back
up sideways maneuvering a cat is so much
easier big one for the cat that's right
Anchorage access goes to the catamaran
yeah it's it's much easier to find a
comfortable spot in most Anchorage's on
a catamaran but it's not just because of
the shallower draft I mean that's one
reason when conditions are rougher
further out you can get closer to Beach
where it's shallower but something
people don't talk about a lot are bugs
and there are some there are times there
are conditions where it's much more
comfortable to be out further away from
the beach than close in because the bugs
are biting closer in in a catamaran you
can get further out and not be quite as
affected by swell in the mana hole you
really get a tuck in clothes
this one is a little bit
counterintuitive shallow-water that's
right okay see the mana Hall goes to the
mana Hall we are talking about
navigating in shallow waters and you
might think okay the shoal draft is
gonna make it easier to navigate in
shallower waters however with the
catamaran you have two holes so if you
do go aground you have one chance to get
off that's to back away with a monohull
you hit ground and if you get a lifting
keel you can lift it up or if you don't
you can also heal the boat over you can
catch off with an anchor tip the boat
sideways and get yourself off that way
so in that way shallow water navigation
we actually give it to the monahons
and the third category is livability
that's right
what it's like to live on these things
day to day and I see a lot of green in
the camera I don't think they're gonna
be a lot of surprises for you here yeah
most of these go to the camera let's
break it down number one
comfort and anchor yes do we need to
even say anything else you're not
rolling around you're anchored you're
flat it's basically like a houseboat at
that point very comfortable living at
anchor on a catamaran and you spends
probably 90 to 95% of your time at
anchor now remember our flopper stoppers
with blood pressure yeah to get rid of
the role in the Pacific on our first big
mana haul we had flopper Stoppers they
are like these wings that you put out
from the boom and from a spinnaker pole
and they dampen the roll and it was an
art we could get the boat fairly flat
but then the wind would shift you just a
little bit and you're rolling again it's
a great name flopper start on first off
for the mono holes that's right water
access it's really nice on the catamaran
with the sugar scoops that's right some
of the newer mono holes have the
low easy-access transoms that you can
swim right up to and it's only maybe
this far off the water but by-and-large
monohulls you're climbing up a ladder to
get out of the water whereas with the
sugar scoops it's basically like a
little staircase that's very very yes
the davits okay how often do we see our
mana hole sailing friends towing their
dinghy oh my god everywhere it's
actually a little dangerous to do that
not only are you slowing your boat down
but they did thingies do flips sometimes
and yeah you get into some big following
seas it can Ram the back of your boat
and it's also an opportunity for
somebody to take the dinghy pretty
easily with davits like we've got it's
pretty easy to raise the boat the dinghy
up whenever we're not using it in fact
we barely ever well we never told the
dinghy
but we barely even leave it in the water
yeah we go we hoist it out because it's
just so easy and the sound of it you
know hitting the hole or just seeing the
water so davits are such a great thing
on the catamaran shade yes
Shay both to the catamaran yeah you
basically got like a back porch here we
called the front porch and it's very
well shaded a lot of the modern casts
are exactly this way mud holes you got a
cockpit frequently you'll put some shade
over it but you just don't have the
shaded space is our sunscreen people ask
oh you must go through so much sunscreen
no we just stay in the shade that's
right right you stay cooler that way too
pet friendly goes to the catamaran which
is the reason why we ended up in a
catamaran sugar really helped us make
that decision because that was a deal
killer for her on the model yeah as she
was getting older and older she was
comfortable at first on the mono haul
then she just would kind of crouched in
the corner we've got friends that have
large dogs on monohulls it's doable but
it's so much easier yeah and this is
just our opinion right and the next one
is yes yeah this is another one of the
main reasons why we went with a
catamaran we had had guests on our mana
halls and even on the 46 footer which
was fairly large it was very difficult
to get private space just to get to an
area where is quiet one couple can chat
while the other one isn't disturbed
obviously with the two holes and in this
case four bedrooms everybody gets a
private corner that's great and noise
yes well on a mana hole you're more or
less living in the water that can
actually be kind of cool I remember when
we first got down to Southern California
and we were docked up and it was quiet
and we heard all this whole trickling
and crackling and all these sounds and
we're like what's going on what is that
we had never heard it before
of course that's all the sea life that
you hear in the water around you I
remember once in Alaska we were on a
charter boat up there in a sailboat
monohull and we looked at our little
window and there was like a sea lion
sleeping right next to the boat and it
was just the coolest thing did a mana
hole you're living down in the water
that's noisier in a catamaran you're
living above the water for the most part
yeah so depending on if you like that
kind of noise that can be a positive on
a model for us we like the cats they're
quieter and last one that goes to the
catamaran is exercising something that
we should do more but it's very
difficult to get exercise on a monohull
we had good friends down in Mexico where
they had like a stair stepper stair
climber on their mana hall and a Richard
be down there every other day working up
a sweat but it's difficult with limited
space yeah so we have great space to
work out on the bow we've got the TRX
band so we'll go out there and get a
little bit of muscle toning and
and working out beefing up but yeah just
having more space it's good to get the
exercise so another another category
that the catamaran takes is livability
clear winner in the livability category
this is the final category and it's
called the nuts and bolts this is kind
of a general category yeah it's kind of
general first one is aesthetics well the
winner we think is the mana hole we
don't want to step on any toes here we
like the look of our leopard 46 I think
it's a beautiful boat I don't want to
single anybody out but I do think that
there is a lot of less pleasing
catamarans aesthetically there I don't
want to say ugly but there's a lot of
catamarans out there that are really
really tall and bulbous and boxy looking
and I think in general I like the mana
Hall look that low sleek nautical look
so I kind of have to edge this one in
for monohulls
in terms of aesthetics okay the next
category is ventilation ventilation and
that does go to the catamaran yeah we've
got how many opening ports on this boat
one two three four five six seven eight
if you count the bathrooms you've got 12
opening ports on this boat on our
monohulls it's always been just the
companionway and like two overhead
hatches and that's just about it
the ventilation on a catamaran is just
so much better yeah ah the next one is
solar solar capacity goes to the
catamaran it is all about real estate in
the Solar game and of course when you
got it both it's 25 feet wide and a big
coach roof and overhangs you can put a
lot of solar on we should have close to
1,800 watts of solar by the time we're
done with this next conversion on a
monohull it is difficult to squeeze in
more than maybe seven or eight hundred
watts and that's going to cover all of
your Bimini and we had it on the side
panels you're gonna be sticking it
everywhere
yeah all right the next one is engine
access that goes to the catamarans yeah
we've got separate engine catches the
engines are outboard of the living
spaces and that cuts down on fumes but
also it's much easier to reach around to
different parts of the engines on our
other boats I'll tell you the boat yoga
was even worse in the mana halls trying
to get behind the engine or to the side
that didn't have the access panel it's
much better on a cat in general well
here's one that the monohulls take is
cleaning that's right all that real
estate that gives you the solar and the
workout space I'll tell you it's a lot
more fibreglass to clean 46 foot Munhall
this boat is a leopard 46 46 foot
Munhall a couple hours to get it all
done right to clean this boat it's a
day-long process to do it well polishing
waxing that's all gonna be much more
expensive on a boat this size just
because you've got so much more surface
area yeah so cleaning we give it to the
model yeah whole cleaning goes to the
catamarans you've got more hole to clean
on a catamaran you've got two holes but
it's actually easier to clean because
the shallower draft means you're not
diving down quite as far you've got
scuba equipment this doesn't matter at
all but in general I would say that
cleaning the holes on a cat is easier
than cleaning the deeper hole on a mono
hole and the final topic is organization
which I think goes to the catamaran yeah
I think it's it's a pretty easy call
here it is so difficult to stay
organized on boats in general you've got
all these spare parts
you've got provisions you've got your
clothes
you've got camera equipment you've got
dog stuff and it's really really hard to
organize your stuff on any boat on a
mana hall where all the storage is
crammed back and below and on the sides
you have quite quite a few less opening
ports so staying organized on a model is
much harder on a catamaran all that
storage can actually be a bit of a
problem because you've got the space for
it you can fit it on board it's pretty
easy to overload yeah cat yeah we still
need to go through and toss out a lot of
stuff on clarity so obviously we've
given you a lot to consider I don't want
to make it sound like a catamaran is
just hands down better than a mana it
just depends on what you're gonna do
with it I think that if you were gonna
sail only a couple months a year and
have a boat in storage really an
argument could be made for going with a
mana home maybe you're gonna live on
land most the time you don't need all
that space you don't need to have all
those live-aboard accoutrements and
you're not gonna pay all the extra
berthing all the extra haul out fees and
the upfront costs for the boat however
if you're going full-time and you can
afford it I do think that overall the
catamaran is just a very very clear
winner after the miles we've done in
mana halls and the miles were done on
this cat I wouldn't trade living aboard
a catamaran for a monohull or just about
anything yes I think that's a good point
when you're talking full-time living I
would say for sure a catamaran would we
ever have a mana hole for a part-time
living yes absolutely in fact I suspect
that when we're done living full-time on
this cat and we move back to land
part-time full-time we are absolutely
going to have other mana holes in fact
for day sailing I would prefer a mana
hole
I like heeling over just a bit I just
don't want to live on a boat that's
healing over 24/7 while you're underway
yeah yeah so I think it just depends on
what you plan to do with it how badly
you want to get out there if you cannot
wait and you're talking three five years
down the road I say you might want to
just get yourself a monohull even if
it's an inexpensive one that you can do
on the weekends or on your vacations I
think that our YouTube channel and maybe
other YouTube channels might make it
seem like you just have to have a
catamaran in order to go cruising and I
just don't think that that's the case
yeah we don't agree with that yeah if
it's a choice between going now with a
mana hole you can afford or waiting 10
years or even five years to do it on a
catamaran I say by the Affordable mana
hole now go get a taste of the life you
can always change it up and go to a cat
later if you really really like it thank
you so much for tuning in while we are
living at the dock here in Wilmington
yeah we will have some other boat
project related videos coming up for you
in the next couple of weeks we really
really appreciate your likes and your
subscriptions and all your comments it's
really been fantastic to have this
interaction in fact videos like this
well they come to mind because of the
questions that you're asking we read all
your comments all your emails and that
really sets us up for doing videos that
spread the love spread the knowledge
just a bit
yeah and it's fun for us to go through
these again and organize it in our minds
as well and and cover these topics so
it's it's fun thank you and it makes us
appreciate this cat just a little bit
more yeah okay see you next time all
right